Add rollout upgrade docs page (#583)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/capi/howto/rollout-upgrades.md

# Upgrade the Kubernetes version of a cluster

This guide will walk you through the steps to rollout an upgrade for a
Cluster API managed Kubernetes cluster. The upgrade process includes updating
the Kubernetes version of the control plane and worker nodes.

## Prerequisites

To follow this guide, you will need:

- A Kubernetes management cluster with Cluster API and providers installed
  and configured.
- A target workload cluster managed by CAPI.
- `kubectl` installed and configured to access your management cluster.
- The workload cluster kubeconfig. We will refer to it as `c1-kubeconfig.yaml`
  in the following steps.

Please refer to the [getting-started guide][getting-started] for instructions
on how to set this up.
In the following steps we will refer to the workload cluster as `c1` and its
kubeconfig as `c1-kubeconfig.yaml`.

## Check the current cluster status

Before starting the upgrade, ensure your management cluster is in a healthy
state.

```
kubectl get nodes -o wide
```

Also, verify that the workload cluster runs on the expected Kubernetes version

```
kubectl --kubeconfig c1-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes -o wide
```

## Update the CK8sControlPlane resource

> The first step in upgrading the control plane is to update the CK8sControlPlane
> resource with the new Kubernetes version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step in upgrading the control plane is to update the CK8sControlPlane
resource with the new Kubernetes version. In this example, the control plane
is called `c1-control-plane`.
```
Wdyt?

Author: sounds good, thanks!

```
kubectl edit ck8scontrolplane c1-control-plane
```

Replace the `spec.version` field with the desired Kubernetes version.

```yaml
spec:
  version: v1.30.3
```

Save and exit the editor.

## Monitor the upgrade process

CAPI will handle the rolling upgrade of control plane nodes.
You can watch the progress with

```
kubectl get ck8scontrolplane c1-control-plane -w
```

Inspect the current machines with

```
kubectl --kubeconfig c1-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes -o wide
```

The machines will be replaces one after each other until all machines run on
the desired version.

## Update the MachineDeployment resource

After upgrading the control plane, proceed with upgrading the worker nodes

> in a similar fashion by updating the `MachineDeployment` resource.

Author: thanks!

# Upgrade the Kubernetes version of a cluster

This guide will walk you through the steps to rollout an upgrade for a
Cluster API managed Kubernetes cluster. The upgrade process includes updating
the Kubernetes version of the control plane and worker nodes.

## Prerequisites

To follow this guide, you will need:

- A Kubernetes management cluster with Cluster API and providers installed
  and configured.
- A target workload cluster managed by CAPI.
- `kubectl` installed and configured to access your management cluster.
- The workload cluster kubeconfig. We will refer to it as `c1-kubeconfig.yaml`
  in the following steps.

> Please refer to the [getting-started guide][getting-started] for instructions
> on how to set this up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please refer to the [getting-started guide][getting-started] for further details on the required setup.
```

In the following steps we will refer to the workload cluster as `c1` and its
kubeconfig as `c1-kubeconfig.yaml`.

## Check the current cluster status

> Before starting the upgrade, ensure your management cluster is in a healthy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prior to the upgrade, ensure that the management cluster is in a healthy
```

state.

```
kubectl get nodes -o wide
```

> Also, verify that the workload cluster runs on the expected Kubernetes version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Confirm the Kubernetes version of the workload cluster is as expected:
```

```
kubectl --kubeconfig c1-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes -o wide
```

> 

Reviewer 2: We could add a note here to tell people to only update minor versions.

Author: done - thanks for all the great suggestions!

> ## Update the CK8sControlPlane resource

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Update the Control Plane
```
Let's keep headers simplified.

> The first step in upgrading the control plane is to update the CK8sControlPlane

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this first step, update the CK8sControlPlane
```

resource with the new Kubernetes version. In this example, the control plane
is called `c1-control-plane`.

```
kubectl edit ck8scontrolplane c1-control-plane
```

Replace the `spec.version` field with the desired Kubernetes version.

```yaml
spec:
  version: v1.30.3
```

Save and exit the editor.

## Monitor the upgrade process

CAPI will handle the rolling upgrade of control plane nodes.
You can watch the progress with

```
kubectl get ck8scontrolplane c1-control-plane -w
```

Inspect the current machines with

```
kubectl --kubeconfig c1-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes -o wide
```

> The machines will be replaces one after each other until all machines run on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The machines will be replaced in turn until all machines run on
```

the desired version.

## Update the MachineDeployment resource

After upgrading the control plane, proceed with upgrading the worker nodes

> in a similar fashion by updating the `MachineDeployment` resource. For

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
by updating the `MachineDeployment` resource. For
```

> instance, we will be updating the `c1-worker-md`.

Author: machine-deployment

```
kubectl edit machinedeployment c1-worker-md
```

Update the `spec.template.spec.version` field with the desired
Kubernetes version.

```yaml
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      version: v1.30.3
```

Save and exit the editor.

## Monitor the worker node upgrade

> Similar to the control-planes, you can monitor the upgrade with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just like with the control planes, monitor the upgrade using:
```

```
kubectl get machinedeployment c1-worker-md
```

> ## Verify the upgrade

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Verify the Kubernetes upgrade
```

Finally, verify that all nodes are running the new version and are healthy:

```
kubectl --kubeconfig c1-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes -o wide
```

> and that no old machines are left behind:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a last step, ensure that no old machines are left behind:
```

Cluster API managed Kubernetes cluster. The upgrade process includes updating
the Kubernetes version of the control plane and worker nodes.

## Prerequisites

To follow this guide, you will need:

- A Kubernetes management cluster with Cluster API and providers installed
  and configured.
- A target workload cluster managed by CAPI.
- `kubectl` installed and configured to access your management cluster.
- The workload cluster kubeconfig. We will refer to it as `c1-kubeconfig.yaml`
  in the following steps.

Please refer to the [getting-started guide][getting-started] for further
details on the required setup.
This guide refers to the workload cluster as `c1` and its
kubeconfig as `c1-kubeconfig.yaml`.

## Check the current cluster status

Prior to the upgrade, ensure that the management cluster is in a healthy
state.

```
kubectl get nodes -o wide
```

Confirm the Kubernetes version of the workload cluster:

```
kubectl --kubeconfig c1-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes -o wide
```

```{note} For rollout upgrades, only the minor version should be updated.
```
<!-- TODO(ben): add reference to in-place upgrades once we have those docs. -->

> ## Update the Control Plane

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Update the control plane
```

In this first step, update the CK8sControlPlane
resource with the new Kubernetes version. In this example, the control plane
is called `c1-control-plane`.

```
kubectl edit ck8scontrolplane c1-control-plane
```

Replace the `spec.version` field with the new Kubernetes version.

```yaml
spec:
  version: v1.30.3
```

> Please safe your changes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please save your changes.
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

## Monitor the control plane upgrade

Watch CAPI handle the rolling upgrade of control plane nodes, by running the
following command:

```
kubectl get ck8scontrolplane c1-control-plane -w
```

To inspect the current machines, execute:

```
kubectl --kubeconfig c1-kubeconfig.yaml get nodes -o wide
```

The machines will be replaced in turn until all machines run on
the desired version.

> ## Update the Worker nodes

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Update the worker nodes
```

After upgrading the control plane, proceed with upgrading the worker nodes
by updating the `MachineDeployment` resource. For
instance, we will be updating the `c1-worker-md`.

```
kubectl edit machinedeployment c1-worker-md
```

Update the `spec.template.spec.version` field with the new
Kubernetes version.

```yaml
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      version: v1.30.3
```

> Please safe your changes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Please save your changes.
```
